when the sex Falls away it can become a
serious problem and the largest study
done on the quality of sex with 70,000
people in 24 countries found the
differences between people who say they
have a great sex life have an awful sex
life has to do with really that's right
DRS John and Julie Gutman are
world-renowned psychologists and
researchers who have studied over 40,000
couples written over 50 books and helped
millions of people find and stay in love
for over 50 years people don't know how
to have good relationships so I've got
so many questions I'll start from the
top what are we getting wrong well first
of all most people are living under the
myth that you have to be compatible with
a partner which is absolutely wrong and
this is really interesting there t-shirt
that where women smell t-shirts that
have been worn by men for at least 2
days and selected the ones they thought
smelled the best and they found they
were selecting the men that were his
most Divergent from them genetically
rather than people who are like them cuz
we're not really turned on by our Al and
there isn't a one looking for the one is
a big mistake what about how do I become
the most attractive version of me if I'm
looking for a partner yeah that's a
great question and this is what you do
this is a difficult question to ask but
have you ever seen cheating help a
relationship oh very very often really
when there's recovery but can it be
treated
75% so far in our research how we
developed a model and here's what it
involves first
this is a sentence I never thought I'd
say in my life um we've just hit 7
million subscribers on YouTube and I
want to say a huge thank you to all of
you that show up here every Monday and
Thursday to watch our conversations um
from the bottom of my heart but also on
behalf of my team who you don't always
get to meet there's almost 50 people now
behind the dire of a CEO that work to
put this together so from all of us
thank you so much um we did a raffle
last month and we gave away prizes for
people that subscribed to the show up
until 7 million subscribers and you guys
love that raffle so much that we're
going to continue it so every single
month we're giving away money can't buy
prizes including meetings with me
invites to our events and ,000 gift
vouchers to anyone that subscribes to
the DI Co there's now more than 7
million of you so if you make the
decision to subscribe today you can be
one of those lucky people thank you from
the bottom of my heart let's get to the
conversation John
Julie why do you both do what you
do I love that question one has to
Define what we do and there are many
things that we do first of all I love to
write that's great I've been helping
people since I was eight years old for
some odd
reason uh and I love love love
connecting with people and loving them
through their
pain that's why I do what I do and would
you CL yourself as a clinical
psychologist is that your official title
yes okay John could you answer the same
question which is why do you do what you
do and I guess what do you do well to me
it's really an interesting puzzle to try
to understand what makes relationships
work and what makes groups work what
what
makes people be cooperative versus
competitive selfish and mean what makes
them be altruistic and empathetic what
makes what makes relationships become
sources of longevity and health versus
illness and loneliness and despair so
for me it's a puzzle and it's fun to
work on a
puzzle and what do you do I measure
things accurately and
reliably and you know then really just
kind of see where the data fall out so
um it's really applying statistics and
measurement and good math to try to
understand processes that are going on
between people with this really ultimate
question of what what makes
relationships work and what makes groups
work what makes humans cooperative and
magnificent at their best versus selfish
uh greedy and functioning at their worst
so it's curiosity that drives me that's
all and collectively how many people do
you think you've studied researched
treated worked with in your practice
over the last however many decades well
we've done research on 40,000 couples
about the start couple therapy uh using
questionnaires and then more intensely
using physiology and and objective
rating of emotional Behavior about 3,000
couples follow it over time as long as
20 years and how many books have you
collectively written
Julie I think we're on
51 but I'm not sure I've
lost I amum where I wanted to start with
this conversation is is really with I
guess the subje of relationships but how
we find and form them in the modern
society because when you look at the
stats despite the incredible work you've
done over the last couple of decades it
doesn't seem that we're better at
finding and keeping relationship than
ever before if you especially if you
look at non-romantic relationships you
know loneliness and isolation are
absolute alltime highs and the
technology that was invented over the
last couple of decades came with a
promise which was that it was going to
connect us but it doesn't seem to have
succeeded so I really want to start by
answering this question about how people
find love and form those relationships
in the modern world and like what the
data says and what what our psychology
says about where we're going wrong I had
some independent research that I found
uh that says according to the US Census
Bureau nearly 50% of the US population
are currently single according to the
2023 survey by pe research about 33% of
men reported being single followed by
28% of women the average first marriage
for men is 30 years old for women it's
about 28 um we're having less sex
however before um we're getting in
relationships later than ever before
marriages still seem to break down
almost half of them and you probably
know those numbers better than me and
almost half of people are using dating
apps but I think if you speak to anybody
that uses a dating app they feel like
they're all having a bad time when we
think about finding someone to love us
or that we love how much of our effort
should be about actively going out there
and putting ourselves out there buying a
new dress whatever it is putting
ourselves out in the market versus the
internal work of building ourselves into
someone that is a magnet instead of a
door to-door salesman you know what I
mean beautiful beautiful yes um I love
your uh thought about developing
ourselves internally because that's what
goes wrong that makes dating app so
terrible many many people suffer from
terrible insecurity right they feel
shame they may have been criticized a
lot as a kid or in their work and as a
result they hide out they hide and what
they present to the world either through
dating apps this is very common or just
even meeting people at a party is
something they're not it's something
that they believe is the ideal but where
are they getting their information
they're getting it from TV from
Hollywood from idealized Heroes and
heroins that are not real also they're
living under the myth
that you have to be
compatible with a partner which is
absolutely wrong as will talk about um
in other words you have to have the same
interests the same values uh maybe the
same background the same uh class you
were raised in and so on all of that is
wrong interestingly enough so when you
talk about building that internal World
basically what you're saying
is trust your own intuition trust who
you are people will come to you if you
are genuinely yourself and if you're
not um then people may mistake you for
somebody else have an expectation of who
you are and you're in inevitably going
to fail that
expectation which then gives you a
negative
experience uh because you feel like this
other person person is rejecting you and
doesn't like you but the reality is
they're not rejecting you they're
rejecting this idealized portrait that
you tried to present to them which isn't
real I guess a lot of people would think
when they hear that but Julie if I show
up as myself no one's going to love me
yeah that's right especially on a first
date that's right that's right that's
you know that's the sadness people don't
believe because of all that criticism in
the
society that they're worthy of Love they
don't believe it they have to you know
be uh I don't know what Bruce Willis or
something in order
to uh have somebody attracted to them
have somebody really want to get to know
them which isn't true at all in fact
it's the
opposite what do you think to that John
yeah I've been thinking a lot about this
question of you know how do we find true
love um and you know part of the problem
I think is that um as you mentioned
loneliness is a very serious thing and
um and so many people are lonely and
part of what they haven't done is to is
build a friendship Network that can
support them friends are just so
important as a precondition for finding
the love of your life because you know
the the research that's been done on
Strangers now shows
that people think that
97% of strangers if they talk to them
will be
rejecting and will feel like they're
invading their privacy but the data
shows that just the opposite is true
that when you approach a stranger almost
97% of the time they're quite delighted
to become contacted and they and they
meet an initial contact with interest
enthusiasm and so talking to strangers
turns out to be really a very important
thing and turning a stranger into a
friend turning your social networks into
places that are not alienating that are
you know places where you actually can
enjoy human and Company uh is an
important pre prerequisite to dating so
I would say you need to build that
friendship Network first and once you're
not lonely you're not desperate and then
you can find somebody much more easily I
think this is a really interesting point
which is you you finish there by saying
if you're not lonely you're not
desperate and I was I was thinking as
you're talking about what the most
attractive version of me is to the world
if I'm looking to find a partner whether
I'm a man or a woman um it doesn't sound
like a desperate version of me is a very
attractive version of me right so on
this point of
Attraction we'll start with you John and
then we'll go because we started with
Julie last time what do we know about
what makes people attracted to each
other like how do I become the most
attractive version of me to the world if
I'm looking for a partner I think
everyone is really interesting and
attractive as long as you know they're
with somebody who's curious about them
so uh if you're with somebody who's
really snobby and uh you know
condescending Superior nobody's at their
best you know but when you're with
somebody who's really interested in you
then you can really emerge and just
about everybody is really interesting
their thoughts are unique and their
background is interesting and their
their goals and their their struggles
are really fascinating so um I think
it's the social context that makes the
difference rather than the individual so
the problem with dating I think is that
they create this very
artificial situation in which everyone's
being
evaluated and assessed and they're
swiping left you know all the time well
my person's not quite right not quite
right not quite right not quite right
the research of Eli fle shows that
there's nothing you can measure in two
individuals that will predict whether
they like each other there's nothing you
can measure nothing you can measure in
fact you can actually ask people exactly
what they're looking for in a partner
and find that exact person in a large
database and it's very unlikely that
they'll like that person when they meet
them yet if you randomly pair them with
strangers 22% of people like each other
when they first
meet I wonder about the role that
self-esteem plays in attraction it's
kind of what we're talking about with
like being desperate maybe they feel
like a similar thing and I wonder if
there's any like data that supports this
idea that self-esteem or your
self-perception is this invisible force
that makes you attractive or not
attractive I've actually seen it in some
of my friends who I won't know who
started going to the gym and just
because they started working on
themselves it's almost like they grew
six Ines like they just were like
different people yeah so yeah a lot of
Attraction we think like go get the blow
dry I'll go get a better outfit but this
goes back to point about how much of it
is actually like do the internal
work what do you
think I think there's a lot to be said
for that yeah if you have a group of
friends you know who really like you and
you really like them then it's easier to
emerge and you know this this dating
situation is so
artificial that people are so terrified
you know when they meet somebody and
instead of approaching them with
curiosity about them they're worried
that they won't make a good impression
and they're so self-conscious of
themselves rather than being curious and
interested in the other person and
because if they're curious and
interested in the other person you know
it doesn't matter what happens right I
mean uh you meet somebody new and you
learn about them and it's an interesting
experience and maybe they're interested
in you too so the dating experience is
just kind of fun you know it's about
exploring two people exploring one
another and then there's no objective
there's no there's no real goal there
and then it's much less artificial and
then when you meet somebody you really
click with that's a wonderful experience
and especially when you meet an outlier
like I met Julie I dated 60 women before
I met Julie she's number 61 I had a
database so I knew
I met an outlier for me she was an
outlier because I just loved interacting
with her it was just so much fun and uh
she was Head and Shoulders above any
person I'd met before do you know what's
interesting though when people look at
you too and when they look at other
relationships they'll go okay John I get
it so you got to make a database you got
to wait till the you find the
one right and this is often the cause of
much procrastination as it relates to
love everyone's looking for the Julie
you know
there isn't a one you know that's one of
the the other myths there isn't a one
and it's funny because we've seen this
in our research on the opposite end of
it and here's what I mean every pairing
of people uh no matter how wonderful
they are no matter how much you love
them the two of you will always have
Perpetual problems between you and those
are based on either lifestyle preference
differences personality differences
always and at some point those conflict
and so you know what we saw in our
research was you know something like
69% of the conflicts that couples suffer
from or have are Perpetual problems they
never go away so you know when I have
somebody coming into my office that says
I want to find my soulmate my soulmate
it's like huh what's a soulmate you know
I mean there you out of out of whatever
in the US we have what 350 million
people there's
probably 500,000 of them that you would
find wonderful and attractive right so
looking for the one is a big mistake
because inevitably they snore at night
or you know they eat with their mouth
open or you know something that drives
you crazy so okay so you're not looking
for the perfect person you're not the
perfect person and that's what I was
referring to earlier as you know let's
see each other as human beings there is
no Perfection we are all flawed we all
have cracks in us and those can be seen
as beautiful too we don't have to be
perfect to be
loved right y
right it's interesting because that
marries to something that I was reading
about in your books where you talk about
how often attracted to people who are
very different from ourselves and just
the very nature that they're different
from us means that there's going to be
that pretty much constant conflict why
is it the case that we're attracted to
people that are different from ourselves
is that true um because it doesn't seem
to make sense on the surface you'd think
I would be attracted to someone that
likes Manchester United and you know
like my favorite food and my favorite
stuff because then we'll get on like a
house on fire but
you're telling me that we're attracted
to people that like yeah the research of
class wakin is so interesting uh this
t-shirt study that he did uh where women
smell t-shirts that have been worn by
men for at least two days and selected
the ones they thought smelled the best
uh they actually were selecting what
wakin found was they were selecting
t-shirts of men those pheromones were
attractive the men were as most
Divergent from them
genetically just in the genes of the
immune
system wa very Divergent kinds of people
smelled really attractive to these women
rather than people who were like them
and actually the experiment was done it
showed they actually like those men
better than other men they might have
met so genetically different genetically
different in terms of the immune system
so here's this uh evolutionary explan
of why people are searching for somebody
who's really different cuz we're not
really turned on by our clone we're not
turned on be by people who are just like
us Julie and I are vastly different
she's you know this uh Adventurer you
know this Outdoors person she loves the
trees and Hiking you know up Mountain
Trails I'm an endorsement I like sitting
in my chair and reading books on
mathematics and quantum mechanics and
general relativity Theory he's a
consumate indoorsman so we're very
different you know but what's the EV
Sher reason then do you think for why we
like people that are different oh the
genetic immunity so um remember it's all
about reprodu reproduction right so if
you've got two very Divergent sets of
genetics in terms of the immune system
that child is going to have a broader uh
genetic base as their immune system as
opposed to two identical or close to it
where they'd have a very narrow genetic
base for immune immunity is there
anything else that if if you were
advising me if I was a single man and I
was saying okay how do I find a partner
um what should I be doing or looking for
should I make a list of things that I'm
looking for um should I be I don't know
you said earlier about being my
authentic self as much as I can be
because that you don't want people to be
attracted to your mask but should I be
making a list like what what should I be
going for is there qualities that are
enduring as it relates to success in
Romance that everyone should be looking
for should I lower my expectations it's
not about qualities it's about well I
hate to say it but it's more about
Behavior so for example um and I have so
many particularly women who've been
divorced and now they're dating and they
ask that question and here are several
of the things that I always tell them
one is uh does the person male or female
ask you questions about yourself or do
they broadcast did they just tell you
who they are oh my God my boss just gave
me a promotion oh my you know aren't I
cool or I just won this athletic
competition no are they asking you
questions about yourself and not only
that but listening to the answers right
and taking in the answers and oh that's
interesting that's one another is you
know our society is very striated right
so how do they treat
people who have let's say less social
status than they do how do they treat
the waitress who comes to their table do
they treat them with disdain or scorn or
you know the stake is terrible take it
back or are they kind do they treat them
like human beings that's another thing
do they treat people equally or uh do
they only treat a certain group with
respect and the others not that's number
two number three is are they reliable do
they do what they say they're going to
do if they say they're going to call you
do they call you if they say I'll pick
you up at 8 are they there at 8 so
reliability is a big deal and of course
nobody can be perfectly reliable you
know life happens but do they call you
to let you know oh I ran into heavy
traffic so I'll be 20 minutes late so
you know there's a
consideration there of your time of your
energy curiosity as John pointed out uh
as to who you are and also
um there are so many people who as you
have been talking about are so terribly
lonely watch out for this watch out for
people saying in the first date oh my
God you're it you're the
answer oh my God you're fantastic I
think I love you you know that kind of
um rush into let's have an intimate
relationship right now I want to marry
you and I'm going to ask you
tomorrow no you know they people need to
take their time to get to know one
another and peel away the layers slowly
and carefully to build trust do you
think that speed to rush into a
relationship is a sign of something else
further up like further Upstream maybe
incity you bet needy there and I don't
like the word needy um because everybody
has needs we're pack animals you know we
need each other we depend on each other
but um somebody who can
contain themselves as you were pointing
out with or without you energy that's
right and have done that internal work
so that they're not looking to you to
answer every problem they have M you
know I would give different advice to to
a male who's who's dating I I would say
you know just have fun you know me
people like when I was creating my
database you know I I met a woman who
was a survivalist he had a 38 Magnum
pistol right by her by her bedside and
she spent thousands of dollars on gowns
to go to Opera cuz she loved Opera and I
remember sitting there in her house and
saying you know God this is really
interesting you know I I don't know if I
like this person or I could be with this
person but she's fascinating you know
it's kind of fun getting to know her and
then at a certain point there's somebody
you meet like I met Julie and everything
feels right the world just kind of opens
up when you talk and your heart opens
and it's very different it's not just
interesting it's really there's
potential there that you don't feel with
anybody else were you desperate when you
met Julie though I don't think I was oh
I don't think I was desperate I I've
been divorced for about seven years I
was looking to meet somebody my you know
close to my age who you know was an
interesting person and uh I met a lot of
interesting people but she was different
I also this question impart because I I
wonder if someone's ever done a study
where they take a group of people who
are looking to find someone and then
they take a group of people who who
aren't really looking and they see who
has the most success and when I say
looking I mean some people are literally
looking for a husband and they they feel
like they need to find one within six
months because you know biological
clocks and goals they might have for
their lives and all these kinds of
things versus a group of people that are
just open to it and I wonder who's more
attractive I think either one can work
right you know I I don't think there has
to be a magic formula so I think I think
if you approach the whole situation with
curiosity and wonder you know and just
kind of see who we meet and see what
happens but but that see sounds more
like this group here you know that's
right I agree with you what you're
describing is
that being confident in yourself and
just being curious as opposed to I
really have to find somebody I need to
find somebody good um very very very
different I think about this in part in
the context of business as well because
as an investor you get an energy from
the entrepreneur that's trying to get
investment from you as to whether they
need you or whether you're an option and
it's so remarkable how much more likely
you are to invest in a Founder who makes
you feel like an option and I think
because and then you have these other
Founders when I can literally think of
one example that popped to my mind from
the last couple of weeks where they were
so desperate that it was almost
rude wow how did that manifest as in the
way that they sent their emails and the
way that they were like demanding and
how urgent they wanted to speak to you
and all these kinds of things and how
like
loky um expectant they were from you
made me feel like their business wasn't
doing
well whereas F and I think about this in
the context of relationships whereas the
founders and entrepreneurs that message
me where they're kind of more patient
they you know they're kind of maybe a
little bit busier the ones that have
that like it's I'll keep going back to
that phrase like with or without you
energy where you're an option to them
you're much more likely to invest you
feel like it's a privilege to invest and
I think about this from the context of
the question I just asked if someone's
like I need a husband now versus
someone's like I'm open I'm curious I'm
willing to go on the date and see yeah
right if we're right because I realize
that me saying yes to you
is a huge investment so I need to take
my time to figure out if that investment
is going to be worthwhile because I
respect
myself right yeah maybe you're right
right maybe it's better if you're just
kind of confident and not so desperate
any fake confidence
Julie this is the problem no you know as
a matter of fact when people try to fake
confidence they often um overstep it
right and uh golly I know I'll never
forget that his fellow in high school he
would brag about himself without knowing
that he was bragging he would boast and
boast and boast and boast and I realized
oh my God I cannot stand this you know
because it was so
fake but important thing I realized that
the extremity of my negative attitude
towards him was because there was a part
of me that was just like them that felt
insecure that wanted to present you know
this Perfect Image to people that I
wasn't uh which is what he was trying to
do and so then it's like oh I've got a
little work to do on myself well you
know one thing one thing about this
dating situation that's interesting is
even though there's nothing you can
measure in individuals that will predict
that they like each other once they get
together and start interacting our lab
can measure if that interaction has
promise or not wow really we measure
openness uh the emotional connection the
fact that people are
either connecting with one another
communicating with one another or not we
measure tension versus
relaxation or we measure uh curiosity
and interest and all those things yeah
so can you give me really specifically
exactly how a couple would show up
really specifically if they were if they
had promised to last and be successful
together so if you watch their videotape
and they had promise you'd find them
laughing together uh you know mirroring
each other smiling uh asking questions
being open uh wondering about things and
you'd have this real sense of
exploration and open openness
and um curiosity and interest in one
another whereas in in a couple that
wasn't doing very well you youd sense
this tension uh sarcasm a lot of you
know
negativity uh bragging about themselves
talking about themselves rather than
being interested in the other person
body language body language the ratio of
positive to negative emotion in in those
couple would be much less than one
whereas it would be 3 to one or 5 to one
among couples who are really getting
along very very well where is this
potential this openness and potential
what's the difference in body language
Let me let me demonstrate it so somebody
who's overconfident pretend he's not
sitting here is just going to be
doing so that for people that aren't
watching laying back on laying back your
arm you know stretch out over the top of
the chair next to you you're leaning
back you know which is to me come to me
you know it's all me um it's all about
me and I'm so cool and somebody who is
really
engaged is going to be more kind of
leaning forward and making eye
contact being fairly relaxed you know
not not hunching their shoulders inward
which shows they're probably depressed
they're insecure they're hiding out but
you know just relaxed their shoulders
are you know not up to their
ears
um they're allowing their eye gaze to
look away as they think about something
and then they look right at you and they
answer the question all of those
indicators that ratio of I to other I Me
Mine you know
predominates uh conversations where
there's all this tension say that again
sir is where you know the conversation
is really about just myself I'm sort of
putting myself in the center versus
being interested in you being interested
in us being interested in we and and
that emerges that openness emerges in
language as well there's also a
reciprocity uh in the sense that um
let's say you and I are meeting um you
asked me some questions about myself
I'll answer those questions but then
I'll ask you I'll come back and ask you
questions about yourself as opposed to
go ahead ask me more questions and more
questions and
more um so I'm only happy when I'm
talking about myself right right so
you know you're going back and forth
exhibiting that Curiosity as opposed to
uh just adoring somebody being curious
about you but not reciprocating by being
curious about them I um it's funny
because you're talking about body
language a second ago and many people
will click on episodes on YouTube or
podcasts that try and teach us body
language but I I think okay you can
learn some of the things but really
again I think body language is a symptom
of what's going on inside how do you
build confidence is really the question
you know especially when you
begin uh let's say in a family or with
caretakers who are critical and
contemptuous of you and when you have
that from practically the ground up as I
did uh
you internalize that and you believe
you're worthless because you were
treated as worthless so how do you build
the confidence right so either through
maybe therapy
through looking at yourself in the
mirror and saying all right this is who
I am this is who I am this is who I am
you know
one I I used to like almost every single
woman no matter how beautiful you are
you will always measure yourself as
inferior to somebody else always as a
woman I mean you've seen already 6
million images of idealized women by the
time you're 18 think about that so how
do you build confidence in what you look
like go to a locker room where women are
undressing and look at their real bodies
and notice the variety notice you you
know the the whatever woman that's
larger than the standard thinner than
the standard women come in all shapes
and sizes so do men and just seeing the
reality the reality as opposed to the
photosho you know that's the thing that
is so difficult about technology is that
these days you know especially with
dating apps and so on people people are
photoshopping their images or they're
taking an image of themselves 30 years
ago and they here is what I am and I
actually still have hair it's the
reality that it's not really about the
appearance it's not even about you know
the IQ or whatever or the education it's
really about the well here we go it's
it's about the heart it's about the
heart is this a kind person is this a
caring person is this a person who
exhibits
compassion who treats people equally and
so on a dating that wouldn't work on
that basis would it no and most people
are lying on taking too that's right is
there a difference in what men and women
look for in a partner as it relates to
attraction when they first meet well you
know that's an interesting question
because uh I remember reading this paper
by Eli fle he says in the introduction
you know
generally uh the dating research
suggests that men are looking for
physical Beauty and women are looking
for occupational competence and wealth
and but actually when he did this really
elaborate speed dating study none of
that actually manifested in people's
preferences uh the preferences were all
in terms of what it felt like to be
together
and both men and women were really
similar so when you interact with
somebody for you're going to interact
with them for 5 minutes and the speed
dating uh situation what made the
difference was how much fun it was to
interact with them for five minutes how
enjoyable it was and men and women were
the same so the the the social context
of dating is so important um because if
it's this very tense you know evaluative
context
nothing is going to work but if it's
this relaxed sort of interested curious
context almost everything's going to
work now a lot of dating happens these
days with alcohol in a nightclub or with
alcohol at maybe dinner or at a bar is
there a better place to conduct a first
date and if so why well first of all
alcohol distorts everything drugs
distort everything you know there's a
reason they say
intoxicated toxic alcohol is toxic so it
shuts down certain parts of the brain
shuts down to some degree uh your
ability to judge your ability to sense
your reflexes your
intuition um all that stuff is shut down
to some degree and so wow she's really
hot I'm going to go for her you know
you're not picking up that you know
she's wearing a wedding ring she's
sitting with a man who has a match in
wedding you know you're not picking up
all that stuff so probably a coffee shop
is nice where we met yeah well I think
it needs to be a context that is not
evaluative um you know I think it has to
be some kind of relaxed context where
you're just kind of getting to know one
another uh yeah and seeing what it's
like to meet this person so it's the
Judgment that makes it tense and
uncomfortable and so people need alcohol
to get relaxed and of course then
they're you know where they get high and
they're laughing at everything and
nothing and there's no there's no
connection there's no real connection uh
so the evaluative context is the is kind
of like um the an the antidote to love
you have an evaluative context you know
you're trying to be your at your best
the other person is trying to be at
their best but you know there's no real
interest in one another when you say
evaluative context it means that we're
evaluating each other it's really really
AAR Jud it's like an interview basically
yeah it's like it's like a job
interview interesting never going to
work is there a certain age where if you
get together with someone you're more
likely to be successful I was talking to
my friend about this actually this
weekend because he is um approaching 40
and his partner is significantly younger
um it's my friend that lives in uh
America in New York and he was telling
me that because she's sort of 23 he's
struggling a little bit because he wants
to settle down and he wants to think
about kids now and she's still trying to
figure out life so it made me wonder if
maybe he should be aiming at people that
are at least that that sort of 30 age
where you start right you know I don't
know if there's any research to you know
I I don't know about the research but
what I've seen clinically is that people
who date uh others that are very very
different in age from them have a
problem typically because first of all
their um the social history in which
they were raised is different right so
for example John and I uh though we're
not the same age we're about nine years
apart but we both went through Vietnam
we both went through all the
assassinations in the US Civil Right the
Civil Rights movement you know I got
arrested he didn't I was unlucky you
know in the protesting stuff but but
that context you know
understanding uh a period of history
that you grew up in is really important
and also internally in the sense that
there are really phases of development
that you go through as you get older and
you're absolutely right Stephen in that
a 40y old old who wants to now settle
down create a home create a family and a
23y old are incredibly different
developmentally so their goals will be
different their values will be different
if you will their maturity will be
different um their interests Also may be
strikingly different there may be a real
difference in valuing commitment you
know and so on uh so I've seen
relationships work with that kind of
desperate age but
typically um that can happen more easily
when you're older when you've already
created your identity you've already
identified what what profession or line
of work you want to do uh whether or not
you want to have kids or if you've
already had kids and so
on so like a 40-year-old and a 50y old
or 55y old would be very different than
a 40y old and a 23y old um good enough
relationships should I be looking for
because this goes back to what I was
saying earlier about you know looking
for the one looking for your Julie or
should I be looking for a relationship
that is good enough um and then try and
build it to be a great relationship
because there's a lot of people that are
maybe over 30 years old over 40 years
old you are single um struggling to find
someone that's great and so they their
friends or their Partners or you know
the people around them are saying just
you know that person's good enough that
person's good enough just you know give
them a chance and go on the date and
yeah I think I think there's a lot to
that point of view uh
because when you know when you're
looking for the perfect relationship
that's good in every
Dimension uh you're going to be
disappointed and uh I think I think it
makes some sense to look for what's good
enough and so you know what's good
enough for one person is not the same as
what's good enough for another person I
know you know what's good enough for me
is having somebody you can really trust
and really feel a sense of commitment
toward and those two dimensions are
absolutely critical is that what did you
have non-negotiables both of you I were
there was there anything on your list of
things that were mandatory in finding
your partner yeah for me it was wanting
children so that's the non-negotiable
for you yes was there anything
else that was
non-negotiable uh monogamy okay yeah for
me
yeah sense of
humor was really
important I think another thing too is
do you get bored talking to them or not
or are they continually in interesting
to you um but I think one of the most
important things is how do they make you
feel about
yourself not just you know you're
attracted to them or whatever but how do
they make you feel about
yourself if they make you
feel uh dumb or unkind or too needy or
whatever not cool on the other hand if
they make you feel like the most
gorgeous thing in the world and the most
brilliant person in the world Etc and
you know you're not that's not it
either you know so do they recognize you
it's almost like that do they recognize
you in your fullness of humanity and you
know that takes time of course you have
to get to know one
another
um but let's see you
nebl I know very quickly um I think we
both realized
that whatever we spend time together
it's always interesting and
fun that's true talking over anything
it's really that's true and everything
that you said everything that came out
of your mouth was so fraking fascinating
I knew I would be learning from him the
rest of my life yeah I felt the same way
about you you know and Road a road trip
trip was an opportunity it was really
you know a time to talk about our dreams
and our hopes about the world and
yeah what about sex and the role that
plays in attraction I asked this
question because I had a relationship
when I used to live in New York and I
really really liked this person we got
on all the things you described the road
trips everything was fun and then when
it came to the point where we had sexual
intimacy it just wasn't there yeah and
it was it was crushing for me because
this person was perfect in every
conceivable way smart kind fun
everything I just and then the minute we
moved to the the next stage it just
wasn't there I just wasn't sexually
attracted had that experience too and so
it made me add to my list of
non-negotiables a third thing at the
time there was two things on that list
the first was they kind of helped me
become a better version of myself and
however I want to Define that the second
was this intellectual stimulation the
ability to conversate and be interested
in them and them interested in me and
the third became not about appearance at
all it was purely a sexual
connection because yeah and so I just
wonder the role that sexual intimacy and
sexual attraction plays in having a a
good relationship with someone yeah you
know I think that really varies Stephen
because um there's a huge range of the
importance sexuality plays in
individuals you know some people are
practically asexual MH other people you
know it's been a really long time if
they hadn't had sex in four hours so and
everything in between so I think to some
degree that's an individual in a choice
as to how important is sexuality to you
and having a wonderful sexual
connection as opposed to who cares you
know I just want to have cup coffee and
a pastry you know it
so every individual needs to decide that
for themselves how important it is and
then you know if it if it is important
even of average importance it's really
important yeah but the other thing too
that's interesting I mean we're talking
about dating but I've also seen
relationships that have been together
for a long time and uh the sex Falls
away
mhm but it's much more important to one
person than the other and they
diverged and it becomes you know a
pretty serious problem uh it didn't
start off that way but it can become
that way and what happens in those
scenarios well you know typically it's
really interesting um of course in
second well second marriages or
relationships at let's say over 40 or so
um women uh especially women going
through per menopause you know finishing
with
menopause um sex hormones go way down
they go way down and so are they still
interested in having sex
well they may not be so interested in it
that they want to initiate sex but we
all
hardwired in particular ways um so you
touch there you lick there you know you
stimulate here and that wiring is going
to kick in and the sexuality will kick
in again and the sexual responsiveness
will kick in so um you can work on that
angle number one but number two often
times there have been big emotional
injuries IES that have broken trust that
have broken emotional
connection
and okay so two theories
one most men in Western culture are not
uh they don't accept themselves if they
just want to
cuddle that's not
masculine right so everybody needs touch
but for many many men who bought into
that the only way they can get touch is
through sex they can't just say will you
please just hold me women can because
women are considered you know more
vulnerable and uh softer and it's okay
for them you know to ask to just be held
but not for men so you know sex becomes
a difficult thing there too especially
with an ultra m Uline man where he's
just come back from war he wants to just
be held but he can't ask for that he's
got to be tough and strong and sexy
therefore he'll go for
sex any thoughts on that John I I I
think I agree with you I it it's it's
not negotiable you know it's it's one of
these intangible things that you know if
it's not there it's not going to work
very well in the beginning if it's not
there right I mean
it's yeah I think it needs to be there
because it goes on a journey all
relationships it's funny because from
doing this podcast and speaking to a lot
of sort of sex therapists or Coupes
therapists this one of them said
something to me one day or maybe two of
them said the same point I think two or
three of them so the same point which is
much of what makes sex so you know
arousing is the spontaneity and the
novess the newness of it the excitement
of it all these kinds of things and they
said to me that love is in many respects
the opposite of that it's the opposite
of spontaneity and love is like security
and trust and dependability and it's you
know knowing someone so I I've spoken to
a few of my friends in fact about this
Balancing Act between like I really love
this person I know them and I'm there
for them and we we know everything about
each other
and then like having to fight to also
create this excitement like how do I how
do I love you like we've known each
other for 10 years and you can trust me
and depend on me but then how do I have
sex with you like like we've just
met it's this so we call it the coolage
effect have you heard of this uh Kelvin
coolage uh was President of the United
States and he and his wife were visiting
visiting a farm and uh and as the
president uh was led past these uh
chickens and roosters the farmer said oh
uh this rooster has sex 17 times a day
and Mrs kulage wanted me to point that
out to you Mr President when she came by
here because we pointed out that rooster
as sex 17 times a day and Calvin Coan
said with the same head
and the farmer said no always a
different H he said and president said
tell that to Mrs
kulage so the coolage effect is that it
has to be novel it has to be exciting to
be eronic right and familiarity you know
which creates security and relaxation
and openness is antithetical to the
novelty that creates sexual excitement
but the truth is actually not so simple
uh because eroticism often really
results from really creating an erotic
situation together and making it an
erotic situation and for women
especially feeling safe and feeling
emotionally connected is a prerequisite
for feeling really attracted and feeling
that this is an erotic situation that
emotional connection is necessary for
many women because women have such a
strange relationship to safety and fear
compared to men the world is so much
more dangerous place for women than it
is for men women really need that
emotional safety and connection in order
to feel that the situation is erotic at
all it's important for your your
audience to realize that the largest
study done on the quality of sex with
70,000 people in 24 countries found that
the differences between people who say
they have a great sex life and people
say they have an awful sex life has to
do with affection and emotional
connection that people have a great sex
life say I love you every day and mean
it kiss each other passionately for no
reason at all cuddle they're
affectionate even in public they have
romantic dates so affection and
emotional connection for most people all
over the planet Are connected rather
than there being this dichotomy between
if you're close and if your friendship
is good sex is going to be terrible and
if you're distant and you know and it's
novel sex is going to be great just not
true that's right and is there a certain
amount of because a lot of couples fall
into this trap of sort of fake
comparison whether it's social media or
movies where we think okay if we're not
having sex three times a week
something's wrong I need to raise it we
need to argue about it we need to fix
it is there any Merit to the
quantity resulting in you know happiness
no no relationship between quantity and
happiness quality yes well with the
caveat with the caveat that if you have
two people paired together one who is
extremely sexual MH and you know really
does need sex frequently and the other
one uh the opposite sexual who is more
asexual and you know could take it or
leave it want sex maybe once a month
that's not going to work that's not
going to
work one of the things me and my friends
have been deliberating about is the
importance of what we call Desire
management which is if someone is like
around too much and they're there every
second of every day in the house when I
get home you know everywhere does that
not to some degree start to kill the
desire a little bit one of the best
things that I I think I found in my
relationship is that my partner is
always working away then I'm working
away and so when we see each other it
feels special and
interesting but I personally don't know
that if we were both in the house seven
days a week and I worked from home with
her whether the desire would be the same
I don't know you know I I I think that
for example John and I are around each
other 7 days a week and we have been for
you know most of our marriage but it
doesn't matter um is that because of my
attachment style maybe because you know
I wondered if yeah yeah could be could
be I need a lot of
solitude yeah but you all around each
other yeah but you're around each other
most of the time you well we are but but
you know in a house where there's enough
space in the house to not be in visual
contact with the other person all the
time right you see so he's downstairs I
may be upstairs something like that or I
can maybe hear him maybe not he can hear
me maybe not you know
so
um I think there is something wonderful
about being a part and then coming
together that reunion after you've been
a part for a while is really quite
delicious you know what though this is
so interesting I I am working with an
individual right now uh and they're both
artists they both travel a whole bunch
all the time and whenever they reunite
after one of them is
gone nothing there's nothing for about
two or three days and then they have to
get into the same rhythm again
someone said to me on this podcast they
said you have to spend 90 minutes a week
talking to your partner and if you don't
and the person actually said to me if
you don't get that into your dumb skull
you'll be spending much more time with
them in divorce court oh and wow I know
it was a it was a Brash thing to say but
I reflected on it and it really helped
me because I think I don't know I'm I'm
speaking as a man so I can't speak for
all men I can't speak for women but
speaking for as a man myself and also on
behalf of my friends with my own
attachment Stu I think that's important
to add I struggle with naturally with
conflict resolution because conflict
resolution to me sounds like blame so if
my when my partner says we need to talk
I'm like oh my [__] god what have I
done now that's right what have I done
now and I sit there like a you know I
feel like it's a a kid in school being
told off by their like the Headmaster or
the a child being told of by their
mother I'm like go on tell me all the
ways that I'm inadequate but the phase
of this idea of you're going to have to
spend 90 minutes a week sitting with
each other and talking regardless help
me because he he then went on to say
because if you do that then you can get
to play well I think here's here's my
invention I have a notebook in my back
pocket oh yeah interesting and it's just
designed for when Julie says we need to
talk and I take out the notebook and a
pen and I say okay talk to me I'm taking
notes I want to know what's going on and
she'll tell me I'm disappointed you or
angry you know I mean whatever says you
know I write it down and reflect it back
and see if I understand what you're
saying yeah and so I think I think it's
not just 90 minutes it's 90 minutes when
you're willing to listen non-defensively
which is not easy that's not easy that's
really the work in relationships is
being
non-defensive but that's why we wrote
fight right yeah you know and when we
gave you know talk uh it's it's
really so important to not do that you
you you you blaming thing that blaming
it's you know I feel about what what's
the situation not you know the way you
fail me it's the situation Julie is it
is it more often men or women that are
saying that I feel
are you kidding men are catching up but
it's hard it's hard for men to do that
women I mean you go to mental health
expertise and all the characteristics of
uh a man that are considered mentally
healthy autonomy
Independence uh strength resilience
resilience you know all the stuff that's
autonomous for women
vulnerability sensitivity empath empathy
expressing emotion so you know there's
only one emotion that men are allowed to
really openly Express
anger right can they express fear oh my
God I'm so scared of going in there
tomorrow or sadness or you know the more
vulnerable
emotions it's God think about it it's
seen as
effeminate and that's supposed to be
bad why is that bad because women are
second class
citizens right so to be allegedly like a
woman and express vulnerable emotions is
a bad thing because you shouldn't be
like a woman why
not you know I mean so
expressing vulnerable emotions I think
men are starting to catch up you know
don't women like
strength yes and no they like strength
but the problem is is that they also
want to be
empathetic too they want to be you know
nourishing to their partner and if their
partner is always presenting this facade
of strength they can't get close to them
it's like the of connection yeah but you
know we we observed 8-year-olds in
playgrounds uh and if you if you look at
eight-year-old boys they'll do run and
chase games over a very large distance
and if an emotional event happens if
somebody gets upset you know say what's
the matter Brian says the leader of the
group say I never get the ball okay toss
the ball to Brian Brian gets the ball
and they're of and running they keep the
game in Play
manage conflict quickly look at two look
at girls they're playing in groups of
two or three close to the school
building and they're talking about their
feelings over and over again you know
you said that I was a baby you know cuz
I had those barrettes that really hurt
my feelings yeah well I you know I I
only wear barrettes when when I was
little and now I don't wear them you
know but that hurt my feelings when you
said that so I didn't mean to hurt your
feels they're talking about emotions
constantly and it's like the Hopscotch
or whatever game they're playing is just
an excuse for talking about emotions for
the boys the most important thing is
keeping the ball in play and conflict
gets in the way of that they resolve it
quickly they socialized so
differently is this part the reason why
it feels for many men that they are
being held off all the time because it
actually what's happening is the their
wife is just expressing their emotions
and the man never really expresses it
you know that old sort of slightly
problematic phrase which is happy wife
happy life that's right the reason why
that phrase exists I would assume is
because the man thinks as long as I can
keep her from expressing more problems
to me then I'm happy he like thinks of
his responsibility is just like yeah ask
a man how he's feeling he says well I'm
not hungry I'm not horny uh I'm
okay ask a woman how she's feeling she
says well I don't know know there's
there's you know the children and
there's this and the house and you know
and there's this tangle of questions
that really she has to address when you
ask her how she's feeling there's so
many things and for a guy it's so much
easier but John as man I think we can
both agree that although well I'm
speaking for myself here but although in
the moment going through that conflict
resolution the 90 minutes a week getting
out your notepad listening is annoying
in the moment when we zoom out we
realize that
if they didn't raise these issues if
they didn't Express these issues this
relationship wouldn't be so good that's
right and would' be in serious that's
right they're the managers of intimacy
yeah we need
them yes we need them to
say stepen we need to
talk yeah did you see Steven's face that
was so cutie oh it's true I realize it I
realize that this is serving a purpose
which is helping me you know
us right so I sit there and I'll listen
to you know the things that um the
things that aren't right but you're
right my brain is just like me and my
friends can sit in silence for8 hours
sat right next to each other and we'll
meet each other sit in silence for eight
hours leave great evening great evening
great we both we both like doing our own
thing but it's just I think men are such
simple creatures most of the time oh you
are not that is so not true you know one
of of the things that I've certainly
seen in my my work you know I've been
doing clinical work for 50 years and
what I see is that men have exactly the
same emotions they do they just try to
bury them because it's not okay for them
to express them so they just try to
shove it down but open a little door
crack and up it comes lion old Tiger who
studied men's friendships and women's
friendships said with alcohol men get
together they're very physical and they
talk about their feelings an enormous
amount takes a little alcohol to make it
happen two women said to me last night
that I was speaking to um on uh WhatsApp
um people that I work with in a
different company they were saying to me
that their Partners often express how
they're feeling by just sending songs
out of the blue sending songs sending
songs out of the blue i' never heard of
it because one of them said it and and
the other woman said oh my God my
partner does that too which is instead
of like telling me how he feels he'll
send me a song which just which is
basically how he feels yeah um and some
of those songs are very romantic and
it's like I love you you're the best
person I've ever found but instead they
he they can't he can't vocalize it to
her so he has to send her a Spotify link
and say listen listen to
this but it's the same thing right it's
the that's right inability to to
vocalize which is yep difficult for men
keep working on it
I am yeah I'm like progressively getting
better but sometimes I have little
relapses if you if I am very busy in my
mind and then I have to have one of
those we need to talk chat so I think
you're right there needs to be a bit of
a ritual around like is this a good
time that's right yeah will I have your
attention or you know even being in a
different environment like well you can
make you know make a date to have a talk
like that when we are giving couples
workshops at the very end of it we
always uh give recommendations for ways
of preserving the changes you're making
in the relationship the improvements and
one of them is called the state of the
union meeting right where you start with
five appreciations of each other you
know things you haven't said before that
you've noticed that your partner is
doing right and express your gratitude
or thanks or your
admiration then you go into okay so what
do we need to change what do we need to
improve right and then you finish up
with this beautiful question I just love
this question how can I make you feel
loved this
week and that's
closure you mentioned the word
there
gratitude yes why is gratitude so
important being grateful for them and
expressing that it's something that you
two both du to each other I think I I
think it's indicative of a habit of mind
that's that's really much more important
a habit of Mind where you're noticing
what's going right and feeling
appreciative for it and I I know I wake
up every morning lying next to Julian
and think I'm one lucky guy you know
I've got this wonderful woman and you
know life is good I go through my
checklist everybody's okay all all the
people I love her all right and I'm with
her and I get to see my grandson you
know and my daughter life is
good yeah yeah you know I think
gratitude brings you into the moment
brings you into the moment you know so
and as John pointed out uh you're not
just looking for what's wrong you know
or what your partner is doing wrong
you're looking for what your partner is
doing right
um you know there's been studies who was
it chrysson Robinson I guess um who
looked at unhappy couples versus happy
couples and unhappy it wasn't that they
weren't doing things for one another but
unhappy couples only saw
50% of what their Partners were doing
the positivity of the positivity right
whereas happy couples were seeing it all
the time it's like they're wearing
different sunglasses or something a
different fil different filters well and
the negative habit of mind you know
really puts you in a state of being kind
of irritable and grumpy all the time you
know you're noticing other people are
driving badly and you know and being
careless and making mistakes all the
time and that's all that's all you
see because gratitude puts you on a
different frame of mind so you notice
actually all the good stuff that's going
on right let me draw ACC let me draw a
parallel one of the things that uh I've
done in my private practice I still do
is treat cancer patients in their
families and cancer patients of course
often are facing the possibility of
death
so one of the questions uh and
oftentimes I mean the ones who deal with
their diagnosis best are people who say
okay
I don't have that long to live I'm going
to repr prioritize my life I'm going to
really think about what's most important
to me for the six months I have left so
one of the things that I do in my
practice with
couples um who are just racing through
life together on Parallel tracks not
connecting at
all
uh is to ask them okay you know if you
had 6 months left to
live how would you want to spend it who
would be the most important people that
you would want to draw close
to who would you not value as much how
would you want to spend that six months
and I I first kind of take people into a
very relax state so their minds are
really free to
imagine uh and and what's what's that
doing is it helping to crystallize
whether they should be with this person
uh clarify sometimes but it's more that
oh my God you know I'm wasting my life
trying to make more
money why am I doing that when I've got
this love right here what's more
important to me making more money or
creating more love between us that's
what it comes down to often times
when do you know how do you know when to
quit a relationship how do I know if the
relationship I'm in is bad is not good
because relationships are incredibly
tempting they tempt us back they offer
Comfort which sometimes necessarily
isn't healthy Comfort but they're very
hard to leave and I actually had a
conversation with one of my friends
recently I always talk about my friends
because it's the only way I know to draw
on case studies so instead of me just
hypothetical coming with something
hypothetical I think about the the
challenges my friends face and got
friend who's been in a relationship for
many many years seven eight years um
relationship is broken broken down and
he naturally because the relationship is
broken down is like jumping to repair
but I
wonder if he should even repair because
they've broken up six times they've gone
through this cycle six times so I'm like
are they just rushing back together for
the comfort of the
relationship or um should do they you
know take a moment to say is this even
right but this also the answer here
applies to people that are in
relationships that have those thoughts
in their mind is this the right one how
do you know how do you know if this is a
problem we can solve and should solve or
this is just the wrong
person therapy helps M has your friend
gone to therapy good therapy not with
their partner no then they don't know
you know in other words a lot of people
um
don't know how to deal with Conflict for
example nobody's taking relationships
oneone in high school right to learn how
to deal with conflict or to learn how to
be more vulnerable to somebody else and
be more open and so on so people don't
know how to have good relationships
that's part of what drives the work that
John and I do people just don't know how
to do it and if they did know they could
change those patter patterns and so you
know with your friend for example often
times you know when people have been
together for over you know a couple of
years they create patterns that are like
dark holes you know they're like black
holes that have this tremendous
gravitational pole and so they keep
sinking down in the same patterns over
and over and over and over again right
that's well exactly what Happ your but
you can change those patterns once you
know and practice what the alternatives
are oh okay well I think it's I think
it's not the partner the pattern an
alternative pattern yes I think when
that fund us and admiration system you
know the system of affection and respect
love and respect is gone and gets
replaced by denigration belittling
contempt that's a ton to bail and you've
seen this in your work oh yeah this is
like much of what you guys you know are
known for is this and whenever I hear
people talking about the goans they're
always talking to me about the idea of
contempt and The Four Horsemen
right see those things can change too
those things can change too that often
is what constitutes the bad pattern or
there's been so much of that that now
they avoid each other all together and
there's huge emotional distance what are
the four Horsemen and before we talk
about how we would go about changing if
possible these things for anyone that
doesn't know and how you found these
four
horsemen uh well Bob Lon and I when we
doing our research we first the first
thing we looked at was what's the ratio
of positive to negative emotion in a
conversation so how did you conduct this
experiment really just observing couples
talking about how their day
went wait wait wait bring them into the
lab first of all what's the lab uh the
lab was a room where they sat facing one
another there were video cameras here
and there that were focused
on each individual and their faces and
their body language um there was what
was called a jigal ometer how much they
moved in their chairs you know how much
the chairs move physiological measures
what was happening to their heart rate
you know as well velocity respiration
respiration conductance and all of that
all of that data that was pulled from
those measures was all synchronized you
know hundredth of a second by hundredth
of a second and they would talk for
let's say 15 minutes about the events of
the day and then they were asked to talk
about a problem they hadn't solved and
to try and solve it or talk about it so
that you know ends up being conflict and
then a positive topic and then a
positive topic or in in the apartment
lab they just hung out for you know 12
hours before they went to sleep and the
cameras just rolled while we collected
physiological data so that raal SPI on
them you really SPI spied on them right
except they knew they were
be for 12 hours you watch them just sort
of chill and hang out together couple
that's right how many couples have you
130 and how many couples have been in
the lab in total 3,000 3,00 000 and they
were followed you know so then they'd be
brought back every couple of years right
uh to see how the relationship changed
right so the procedures would be
repeated every couple of years for as
long as 20 years and what did you find
happen so that the initially that ratio
of positive to negative interaction even
talking about how their day went or
especially during Conflict for people
who were in happy stable relationship it
average five positives for every
negative positives about the other
person or about no just positive emotion
like let's describe positives so a
positive can be nodding your head it can
be smiling it can be asking a question
humor validation showing interest
interest in the other person uh negative
would be anger irritability
disappointment hurt disgust contempt uh
shared humor was another big positive
that turned out to be very important
that so that ratio of positive to
negative averaged five to one in
relationships that were stable and happy
during conflict during conflict and
point8 to one in relationships that were
headed for disaster either splitting up
or being together
unhappily uh but certain negatives were
much more predictive of relationship
demise and they were criticism
defensiveness contempt and
stonewalling so let's define what those
are so criticism means blaming a problem
on a personality flaw of your partner
like you're so lazy you'd never think to
clean up the kitchen wouldn't you or God
you're thoughtless you didn't even call
me when you were going to be late you
know thoughtless lazy inconsiderate
selfish okay making about personality
and their character that's right that's
a criticism contempt is the worst that's
sulfuric acid for a
relationship um where you're looking
down your nose with
disgust as well as criticism of the
partner superiority so give me an
example of that you're such an idiot you
know you just never get things right you
know it's just you're just not like me
you know I I'm thoughtful and cons
consider it and you're just you're just
you're stupid you're a narcissist right
you know right so there there's the
criticism but it's making yourself
Superior to that other person MH and
there's a little disgust in it you know
s kind of stuff sarcasm is a good
example mockery you know especially in
front of people yeah right awful so the
person says well I really care how you
feel you really care how I feel you
know so that's contempt Stow malling is
really emotional with don't forget
defensiv and defensiveness yeah so every
defensiveness is the one we all have
it's so hard to get over which is you
know you either kind of whine like an
innocent victim you know I did too pay
the bills on time what do you mean I'm
thoughtful I'm thoughtful I am
thoughtful don't you remember blah blah
blah or it's Counterattack oh yeah
you're so perfect huh you never clean up
the kitchen you know it's that
Counterattack do you find that insecure
people are more defensive sure I have
this like theory that if your
self-esteem and your self- perception of
yourself is fragile then anyone poking
at it at all causes such extreme pain
right that you like you live in a this
state of like I have never done anything
wrong I can't I've do anything wrong and
if someone points out something you've
done wrong it's so painful if you're
insecure right walking on anything yeah
exact it's like a playing with like an
open wound yeah it's like you're a
walking burn victim yeah you know the
way I describe it um because I've been
there I know what that's like is you
know the the Earth if you take uh a
picture of the Earth and the Earth has
this very thin crust on it and then you
go down some layers and in the center is
this boiling hot lava you know
uh that burns you to death well somebody
says to you why didn't you pay the bills
on
time and the Earth opens up you fall
through that crack and straight down
into that hot lava of self loathing that
is Agony absolutely and you feel like
you're getting burned to death so you
can't allow yourself to step into that
crack and say oh God you're right right
I
didn't so you defend you defend oh yeah
well I'm the one who does all the bill
paying what are you doing you know it's
defensiveness well in that case it
sounds like that's fundamentally linked
to some kind of trauma because paying
the you didn't pay the bills to the
average person would be yeah I know
sorry my bad but if that's linked to
maybe I don't know your childhood where
your your father or your mother or the
bullies on the playground told you that
you always you're so forgetful Steve or
Julie you're the most forgetful person
ever in the and they punched
you you could get to you know 40 can't
be yeah can be can be and then
stonewalling this was one that was so
fascinating because you could have you
know a pair of people sitting just like
this looking perfectly normal but you
notice that one is completely shutting
down not showing anything on their face
in their body maybe looking away or just
glaz Ed you know looking and not saying
a word and that's not for seconds it's
for minutes and what's actually going on
because these guys you know John and his
colleagues measured
physiology is that they feel so attacked
that their heart rates are zooming up
above 100 beats a minute which just
sitting here secting cortisol and
adrenaline massively and so they're
shutting down yeah it's a terribly it's
going into fight ORF flight only you're
not facing a
[Music]
whatever issue they keep smashing into
right um but much of why I think from
what I've
heard or at least a symptom of their
relationship is stonewalling but it it's
not minutes one of the one of them it's
month I think I think basically I only
know this because I was showing some
text messages and I looked at the text
messages and I was like oh my God
there's like whenever you talk about
something that might be a little bit
challenging or whatever or um you even
ask how do you think the relationship's
going the other partner is like vacant
like like vacant nothing it's like
they're not expressing their needs
they're not saying what they feel
they're spiraling in their own mind and
then they're just breaking up with you
wow you know it's kind of I don't know
whether that's Stone Walling but it's
also what you were saying about lacking
the tools that was at the heart of the
relationship is one partner spirals
independently and then without you even
knowing it you thought everything was
okay breaks up with you to to give more
context this is a homosexual
relationship yeah between two men yeah
so you know we talked earlier on about
the the woman's sometimes the instigator
of expression of needs yeah it's just
right you know oh that's so sad you know
so it sounds like both of them have
terrible difficulty making themselves
vulnerable to the other and saying what
they feel and it may be that uh when the
if they tried that early on in the
relationship the other one said
something very negative to them back
that felt punishing in terms of
expressing their
emotion and so they made a choice oh God
I can't make myself vulnerable I'm going
to get hurt if I do that so they shut
down but this point about um men not
being very good at expressing their
feelings do we you know with that in
mind and with the ackn knowledge that
expression feelings are good for
building
connection how come homosexual
relationships with men work and I don't
know is there any data to show that they
they last less longer than a
relationship where a woman is um
stereotypically more likely to you know
talk about the the challenges and the
issues and Bridge the
connection someone's got to done the
research on this subject well we you
know we've studied gay and lesbian
couples and compared them to
heterosexual couples as well and years
generally they're less
defensive uh they have a better sense of
humor and they're uh they're much much
more gentle in the way they bring up an
issue with one another men or women in
those homosexual relationship and women
together gay men and lesbians are better
than heterosexuals and they're much less
possessive and domineering as well um
much more of a sense of equality in
their relationships well especially you
know pre well so do we wait pause
pread you know men gave each other much
more autonomy to have sex outside the
relationship right but then AIDS kicked
in and a lot of that shut down now it's
opening up again so they're giving
themselves sexual Freedom as long as
there isn't a lot of emotional
connection and falling in love with the
third party women don't do that nearly
as
much they're uh they tend to feel very
insecure around polygamy let's say or
polyamory uh and so they really are more
wanting monogamy with their
Partners
so am I right in thinking John that
you're saying that h sexual
relationships are better than
heterosexual relationships are they are
better in general they're better do you
know if they last
longer I don't know that there's data on
that I don't think there are differences
and how long that last is that right I
don't think there's any
differences you know there's there's
another thing too I mean again it
depends on what period of History you're
talking about but because um being
homosexual has been so stigmatized in
the past you know and there's so much
prejudice against
homosexuality um there's first of all
there's more of a sense of community
amongst gay men and gay women you know
they've they've uh connected with one
another not just as couples but as
community in order to survive the kind
of prejudice they endure out in the
heterosexual Society right so uh and
it's been shown actually the research
has shown this that when the community
really supports the
relationship the relationship does
better so if you've got a community
around
you uh that's a consistent Community
that's really supporting the
relationship that's really going to help
you sustain that
relationship and on these um these four
horsemen a word you didn't mention but I
wondered if it fit in there somewhere is
the word gaslighting which has become
quite popular in society
what is gaslighting how does that show
up so in in in physically violent
relationships um that are
characterologically violent whether it's
a perpetrator and a victim those kinds
of domestic violence quite often the the
perpetrator is communicating to the
victim that everything about the reality
is is wrong they never they never raised
their hand against this person you know
it's just all imagined they're basically
doing you know what happened to in GRE
Bergman in that movie guas light where
she's married to this where she's
married to this guy who who can tries to
convince her that she's mentally ill
that her whole sense of reality is wrong
so he does things like um change the
order of the
pictures and you know in the home uh
steel um jewelry that he's given her
that you know that he says comes from
his mother and grandmother he steals it
and then he says you know where is it
you know you lost it you're so forgetful
and he's constantly sort of uh making
her feel like she's going crazy there
never was a painting there what are you
talking about there's never a painting
there and she know and he's actually
removed it or he's changed the order of
the pictures he's trying to make her
think she's crazy and even her sense of
reality needs him to determine what's
real and what's not real and that's what
gas light comes from let me mention
something because that word you're right
it's really being bandied about commonly
and people have got it
wrong speaking of gasoline um so people
for example who have a conflict and they
have totally different points point of
view about what happened during the
conflict who remembers it better you
know and one will say well you said this
no I didn't I never said
that that they're calling gaslighting
and it's not that is not gaslighting so
it's being misused in the culture all
the time because people always have two
points of view about different
perceptions and any who situation that's
right they have you know everybody has
their own individual filters and so
they're going to hear some things not
hear other things and distort things and
so on memory isn't perfect and so
they're always going to have two points
of view and uh people can get locked
into struggles over no this is the
absolute reality of what happened no it
isn't this is and there is no absolute
reality it's all about perception so
people are calling that gaslighting and
that's not and it isn't that's not what
gaslighting is at what point does it
become gaslighting is that when you're
intentionally trying to make the other
person crazy okay believe that they're
crazy so they don't trust themselves and
these violent relationships that you
know the man will slap the woman across
the face and says God damn it you just
hit me I never hit you I never touched
you yeah I I spoke to a domestic
violence victim once who told me that
her partner when after like love bombing
her so immediately like you know
throwing all all this affection onto her
and you know very very quickly he would
then start like hiding her stuff so he'd
put her car keys in the fridge oh and
he'd be like I didn't why did you put
your car keys in the fridge gaslighting
yeah that's gaslighting perfect
description then she thinks she's going
crazy so he goes well I'm going to have
to take your car keys often and then she
can't she's lost that car that's right
often done in the service of extreme
jealousy yeah and and socially isolating
the victim yeah we've treated domestic
violence um a lot and uh God I'll never
forget this one guy who had put a mark
on the tire and a mark on the
driveway that matched up that lined up
and at the end of the day if those marks
didn't line up he'd beat her up even if
she just went to the grocery store it
didn't matter who did you [__] today
right where'd you
go nowhere oh yeah right you liar you
roar you yeah this is the typical and
naive question people ask when they hear
a story like that their head goes I
would never stay with someone that did
that to me blah blah blah but it not
true yeah not true you know first of all
it doesn't happen
all secondly uh often times the victim
usually you know in a het a row it's a
it's a woman um has her confidence
beaten down so it's not just physical
it's also mental abuse god you're an
idiot man are you stupid and she starts
doubting her own judgment her own
intuition plus you know I don't think
you could survive out there nobody else
is going to want
you and she starts to believe it start
to believe it um and she also has a
dream that he's going to change yeah
because he's so rewardful of what he did
to her he promises he'll never happen
again and he loves her and he's going to
get this under control is he a
narcissist or is it possible that
someone who isn't a narcissist can
perform that behavior or is the word
narcissist in other word that's just
thrown around too much very good A+ yeah
yeah I thought so another word you know
everybody is narcissistic Stephen
everybody is you know narcissism
basically comes from the Instinct for
self-preservation you know you're you're
thinking about okay me what do I need
what do I need how am I going to get it
and so on I've got to really you know
think about taking care of myself
sometimes I mean they call that a
narcissist but the way it really is me
uh is shorthand for a narcissistic
personality disorder which is
Extreme narcissism where there is no
empathy whatsoever the person has no
conscience
whatsoever they can hurt you they can do
everything uh that damages you and um
they take absolutely no responsibility
for it and blame you for it blame the
victim
so uh somebody
who you know says I didn't fail you made
me fail this is what you did that set me
up you know blah blah blah so every
everybody around them is a reflection of
who they are themselves and so they only
see people other people in two
dimensions
how' you go about you said you spoke to
couples and women who had been through
domestic abuse and you know how do you
go about helping
them okay there's two types of domestic
violence John mentioned
characterological domestic violence
that's when there's a clear perpetrator
clear victim nothing the victim can
do uh will change violence there's major
injury so so what has to happen there is
the victim has got to get out of the
relationship because she could be killed
easier said than done right it is that
is correct it is very very hard it has
to be secretive it you know she's got to
plan it especially if there are kids and
so on but there's also that's only
20% of the domestic violence out there
only 20% 80% % of the domestic violence
is what we call situational domestic
violence and in that kind both people
tend to be violent
both the violence is not uh seriously
injuring of the other person it's a slap
it's a push uh it's a holding you know
holding them from moving you know that
kind of thing pushing them down breaking
breaking things throwing things them and
so on and that results from moving into
that flooded State we described earlier
where you're in Conflict your heart rate
is jumping up over 100 beats a minute
you're going to fight or flight and when
you do that you lose access to your
ability to problem solve your ability to
listen actually to um really take in
what the other person is saying you hear
attack attack attack no matter what the
person is saying because it's like your
frontal cortex your prefrontal cortex is
offline so both people typically are
getting flooded during conflict so those
people we can really really help so
we've done a randomized clinical trial
treating those people right and even a
year and a half after has ended when
they when they discuss a conflict on
videotape in their home and we measure
physiology physiology stays low so the
therapy is really effective compared to
a control group as an entrepreneur I'm
always looking for ways to connect and
to create and that's why I decided to
launch the conversation cards I turned
to Shopify who also sponsored this
podcast and Shopify made it so easy to
set up an online store and reach all of
you no matter where are in the world I
remember the challenges we faced when we
first launched the D Co conversation
cards managing inventory ensuring a
seamless checkout process and reaching
our audience Shopify stepped in and made
everything so straightforward and
efficient it was like having an entire
team of experts by our side allowing us
to focus on creating content and
connecting with you what I love about
Shopify is no matter how big you intend
to grow your business they give you
everything you need to take control and
take your business to the next level and
to say thank you for listening to this
podcast we giving you a trial which is
just $11 a month and you can sign up by
going to shopify.com Bartlet the link is
in the description
below is is this part of the reason why
you're in the UK at the moment you you
talked about your trauma oh it's trauma
it's trauma at Oxford yeah we're talking
about drama and also Affairs Affairs
talking about Affairs you're talking
about treating Affairs right right
that's right so I've never really heard
the the phrase treating Affairs as if
it's a you know a condition per se but
your if if there has been an affair or
some form of
infidelity can it be
treated
75% so far in our research cure rate and
when you say Affair what are you
throwing in that bucket in terms of the
definition of an affair is that a text
or is that it can be an emotional affair
as well as a affair a physical Affair a
physical Affair usually so it can be
emotionally you know falling in love
with somebody else without physical
consummation
or physical
consummation uh with somebody that
you've fallen in love with or just
having sex outside the relationship not
an emotional connection but just having
sex when the agreement is
monogamy so almost almost always
involves deception right always it
always does yeah that's that's a big
part of it is the deception and broken
trust you know it what Affairs do is
they turn you know the hurt partner's
world upside down everything they
believed about the partner is
wrong everything that they thought they
shared in terms of values is
wrong um
so you know you can trust the what the
person says no you can't because they
weren't staying at work late they were
going to so and so's
apartment it's like I didn't know this
person I didn't know this yeah who are
you right who are you and you know
relationships are really often times you
know especially committed ones are the
foundation for our whole life you know
we build everything around that often
times our sense of family even our sense
of work sometimes what work we choose
how we live our lives purpose purpose
and meaning that we give our lives
together and when there's betrayal like
that and the person that you thought
your partner was
isn't then that whole thing cracks and
falls to the ground it
shatters and how many people how many
couples cheat in any of those
definitions that you've described
well we don't really know yeah you know
but you know probably around 30% of all
couples is you think it's a conservative
estimate conservative really I've heard
15% of men and women and the thing
that's interesting is that the the stat
for women having Affairs has pretty much
caught up to men now but here's why when
before the' 70s and women's the women's
Liberation movement women were stuck at
home they weren't out in the world
working they didn't have access to
other the Milkman and the uh the plumber
was and the mailman maybe you know they
so you know they were stuck at home
having coffee around their you know
kitchen table with their neighbor woman
you know whoever but once they entered
the
workforce then they had access to a
whole
field our potential people out there and
so you know it's interesting as you say
that Julia I was I was thinking through
all the implications of what would
happen in a woman's life when she she
went out to work and one of the other
things is she would become more
independent in every sense yeah exactly
that's right she doesn't have to stay in
the marriage she can support herself
financially so how did you treat an
affair so we developed a model uh based
on our research called uh the a tone a
tune attach a a a
model and here's what in a nutshell
here's what it involves again it has to
be done in therapy you really can't do
this stuff at home it's it's too intense
first the person who did the
betraying uh needs to resp respond
totally transparently to every question
the hurt partner asks them however the
hurt
partner uh shouldn't probably ask about
the kind of sex they had and here's why
I mean it's it's an important thing
almost every person who suffered through
an affair has PTSD from it
post-traumatic stress disorder and part
of post-traumatic stress disorder is
having these images or flashbacks if you
will come into your mind unbidden you
don't want them there but they come in
anyway and traumatic memory is different
than uh regular memory regular memory
you have a few little fragments
something said and so on traumatic
memory everything comes up at one time
the images the smells the the sounds
the uh adrenaline cortisol and so on so
when uh a woman asks questions about sex
and then gets the answers guess what you
know so her images now are like flooding
her mind with the kind of sex they had
you know the partner and the affair
partner uh that plague her to an even
greater degree and it's horrible so
aone answering the questions and
then saying I'm sorry a thousand times
and really meaning it really really
meaning it I've had
many uh both men and women who've
cheated on their Partners or had affairs
who end up crying during that phase even
the strongest of men will cry when they
realize how hurt the woman is or the man
the other thing that they uh that the
betraying partner needs to do is to
listen to the other partner's feelings
without defensiveness just
listen but in the therapy you know a lot
of times what happens um is that the
therapist has to help shape the hurt
partner's expression of emotion to take
it out of criticism and out of contempt
into I feel destroyed I feel like my you
know my world has fallen apart I feel so
empty so abandoned so rejected so she
has to describe or he has to
describe their own
feelings not how bad the partner was
which is typically what happens at home
so that's the atonement phase a tune and
this has to come after atonement not as
the first thing they start looking at
the actual marriage or relationship
itself and what was wrong with it and a
lot of times what you see uh are couples
who at first might have had terrible
conflict it was so bad they started
avoiding conflict once they avoided
conflict they got more emotionally
distant and the person who did the
betraying got lonely got lonely so
often times the Affairs are not about
just getting more sex they're about
loneliness and beginning to talk to
somebody else about how unhappy they are
and then the third phase is attachment
so it's like reattaching to your partner
that second phase is really rebuilding
trust and the third phase is
recommitting to the relationship and in
many this is not always true I've seen
the opposite but in many cases the
sexual relationship doesn't
resume until phase
three especially if the woman is the one
who's been betrayed but there there are
some where the woman will kind of throw
herself at the man
sexually to compete with the affair
partner and be better than the the
affair partner so you know it can be
both it's um I mean I've got so many
questions that so the first phase was
the atonement atunement and then
attachment um so many questions at
different phases in that I mean so many
of them um I'll start from the top which
was how many times do you apologize a
thousand because is it true that at some
point you've you've got to kind of move
on you have to know you have to know
what you're apologizing for well that
that's important but here's why and you
know
probably some of your audience
especially therapists May disagree with
this but I've treated it for 50 years
PTSD doesn't
disappear it doesn't disappear right it
can get episodes of getting triggered
can be much less frequent over time or
maybe not as intense but it never
disappears so for example you may
apologize a lot during the therapy
things get better better better better
better and then you know a couple months
later after you leave therapy the man is
late home from work and doesn't call
well guess what happens boom she goes
into fullblown
PTSD uh reenactment basically where it's
gotten triggered again and oh my God
he's doing it again you see that's why
you can't stop apologizing and just put
it behind you you don't put PTSD behind
you you see
interesting I guess that's the cost of
cheating is the person it really is
never be the same again it's a high cost
a very high cost that's right yeah I
wrote insecurity as you were talking as
a as a note and I think what I meant
when I wrote that is being cheated on
must create a huge amount of like
lasting insecurity and it kind of links
to the second thing I was writing down
which is this whole question of like why
did you Che on me and it must be for a
lot of people difficult to answer that
question because if it's and also I was
thinking some people don't even know
yeah they don't actually so they might
try and Hazard a guess and do even more
harm right well I think it's because you
gained some weight or I think well uh
you uh I think you um you smell or you
know what I mean when actually it's
something much deeper so like that's
right you know so is that a useful
question to even ask in that setting it
is but again in the setting of therapy
in the setting of therapy you need the
safety hopefully with a good therapist
you need the safety that the therapist
provides um where you know why did she
cheat well because you're an [__] you
know no that's not going to work you
know so I once treated a couple where he
had had 57 Affairs and they'd only been
they had three children under the age of
10 and he'd had 57 Affairs and three of
them he actually fell in love
with okay so you know you can you can
easily say oh because the guy has a
sexual addiction or blah blah blah no
not
true the real reason was that he had
been raped as a kid and he feared oh my
God maybe I'm a latent
homosexual which in his
culture was the worst in the world you
know in the worst way so he had to keep
proving to himself that he was
heterosexual heterosexual heterosexual
over and over and over again and as soon
as he you know we put that together cuz
he just completely blocked it out for
for the most part Boom the affair
stopped
wow it just goes to show how complex it
can be that's right yeah that's
right yeah and it's atonement not not
forgiveness big difference there because
when when carapus emphasized forgiveness
in this aair uh situation they would
blame the Betrayed partner for not
forgiving is it acceptance importance
acceptance of what the situation you
find yourself in no no that's bad
just because you're accepting something
that's
hurtful that's terribly hurtful the
reason I asked that particular question
is because I was thinking about my
friend who's going through this breakup
and um much of the agony that I see
himself in it's because he's like
refusing to accept the situation it
seems and all the resistance situation
situation is basically someone's broken
up with him oh and so it's this constant
rumination of maybe if I do this I can
change it or maybe if I go like almost
like thinking back in time to see see if
he could time travel and fix all his
mistakes and I was and I was saying to
him and this might be bad advice but I
saying to him like I think the first
thing is we have to accept that this is
a situation you find yourself in and
then we'll work from here oh oh oh
that's yeah that's a whole different
meaning of acceptance okay yeah um I
don't mean except the fact that they
cheated on you and like deal that's
that's how I yeah interpreted it at
first but yes acceptance you know I
would call that grounding in the reality
of what you have right
now and then you know really grounding
in it okay I really have made all these
mistakes uh and you know if if the
partner maybe maybe you know tiny little
teeny weeny spark
left um I call it an ember that in
therapy it can be blown on you know to
bring back the fire and the passion and
the relationship array but as John was
pointing out sometimes the person is
only feeling the
ashes of the past relationship there are
no Embers left this is a difficult
question to ask but have you ever seen
cheating help a relationship oh every
time really when there's
recovery every time not every time but
very very often very often when they get
help when they get help if they don't
get help it's not going to you know it's
worse but when they get Help The Help
can help them change all the
patterns in the
relationship and help them learn who the
other person really is what their needs
really are how they want you to turn up
in the
relationship that they had no idea of
before so it can create more intimacy
different kind of trust of course but
more intimacy and more connection
betrayal is always yeah implied prior
conflict avoidance instead of talking to
your partner about what's wrong you talk
to somebody else about what's wrong with
you with the partner
what are some of the um so you're
telling me that 74% of the time Affairs
can be treated 75% of the time Affairs
can be treated roughly um what are some
of the revelations or
realizations that you've had over the
all the years of your work about the
nature of humans and relationships and
love and dating and all these things
that always stick front of mind for you
I'm going to ask you first John um from
a research perspective is there any
particular research which you would
consider to be your favorite research
that was most pivotal for the way you
think that you haven't mentioned yet I
think that
relationships can be great sources of
longevity Health uh great context for
raising children and so they can they
can have this wonderful magic that uh is
health-giving longevity giving and it
just requires
certain condition to be met and those
are the principles that make
relationships work is there a particular
piece of research that um you're most
fond of and that's he's done or somebody
else has done e
both yeah I mean I you know I think this
whole field of social
epidemiology is which has emerged in the
last 50 years really shows that
relationships are lifegiving and
longevity giving uh given today's level
of of medical treatment of chronic
illness it's really relationships that
make the difference and really make the
difference in raising
kids and the last thing I want to talk
to to you about is this idea of bids for
connection because it's a very popular
topic and there's lots of people online
and on Tik Tok discussing the importance
of bids for connection right um what
what are bids for
connection well in this in this
apartment lab that Julie and I built um
there were three cameras um and at the
time um it was only possible to
technologically merge two of them in a
split screen so the people in the in the
control room uh had to use the cameras
in a particular way so that they had a
split screen and they very quickly saw
that uh quite often one person was
trying to get the other person's
attention or interest and so they would
focus on that person who was saying oh
look at that beautiful boat going by and
then they focus the other camera on the
partner and see the response and so this
you had this uh you know sort of um
two-step interaction one attempting to
get the partner's attention making a bid
for connection and the other person
either responding or not responding or
responding irritably turning toward or
turning away or turning against and it
turned out that six years later the
couples who eventually divorced when
they looked back six years earlier they
had turned toward these bids an average
of 33% of the time whereas the couples
who were still married they look back
six years later they had turned to their
Partners bids 86% of the time so this
huge difference 33% versus 86% you
mentioned three responses to a bid for
connection so my partner comes up to me
she goes babe look at this you mentioned
they turn toward them which is me
turning towards my partner saying what
is it babe it's not physical okay mind
you so could be it no what I'm trying to
say is that a lot of people interpret
turning toward us oh you turn your body
toward your partner no it's not it's
just say it's responding to your
partner's uh desire for interest or
attention Okay yeah and then turning
away
is me not responding resp then turning
against would be an irritable kind of
response stop interrupting me I'm
working okay yeah so 86% of the couples
that stayed together were those that
turned toward I they acknowledge the bid
for the couples who stayed married had
turned toward bids and 86% of the time
so when their partner Tred to get their
attention probability of them turning
toward was
86 okay 86% of the time they it turns
out the other thing that was interesting
was that um people who turned toward a
lot tended to have a sense of humor
together during conflict which reduced
physiological arousal so how do you get
people to laugh together when they're
disagreeing and it turns out that if you
increase turning toward people
spontaneously develop more of a sense of
humor about themselves during
that was a really amazing finding of one
of my graduate students dri you can
teach people to turn toward acknowledge
yeah you can you know just increase
awareness I've I've struggled with that
in my relationships I've not been very
good at turning towards I when my
partner makes SPID for connection I've
not been great at I often saw it as like
an interruption or you knew I was busy
or like but from doing this podcast in
fact and speaking to lots of great
people like you guys I've in those
moments I go Steve
[__] the
laptop just turning mid email hi what's
up what's you know and um helps let me
give you a a suggestion you know because
all of us have times when we can't turn
towards right because we've got a
deadline or we've got something but what
you can do is say honey I would really
love to listen to you right now but I've
got to finish this project after I do
another hour of work can we then talk
yeah you see so so you're putting a
bookmark in there that says I want to
talk to you but I've got this competing
that's a nice way of saying goal that I
have to finish and but then we'll talk
my pet says to me it's how you say it oh
you know so I've just got to be like
actually turn my body language so I'm
acknowledging the person not like saying
it while without missing a keystroke
yeah turn my body and say it in a way
that's loving not just one second I'm
just working on something
is not it just you know doesn't do it
not GNA work even worse is just at one
good TR you know C
miners if um if people want to learn
more about all the work that you do how
do they go about finding
you uh well couple of things they can go
to uh gottman.com G TT
mn.com Internet site uh uh there's a
whole bunch of stuff there or they can
go to our
books um and the last one especially if
you're dealing with conflict the last
one is called fight right um but we also
have one that is uh eight
dates um essential conversations for a
lifetime of love and that's a great one
too and there's also a website we
created called Gutman connect right
where people can actually go and take
questionnaires evaluate the strengths
and challenges in their own relationship
and the privacy of their homes and then
access 37 vi video modules that Julie
and I created for improving how you deal
with conflict how you improve intimacy
sexual connection and so on we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest lives leaves a question
for the next I'm going to start with
Julie tell us about a paranormal
experience you've had okay uh
these always I I have uh Visions now and
then and they always happen when I'm
driving for some odd reason so uh I was
driving across the Mojave Desert and I
felt a very strong urge to pull over
okay I always listen to those pulled
over walked into the desert to whatever
felt like the right place sat down
started to
meditate
and felt myself self inside a huge
Golden Mountain that was just
glowing
[Music]
and it took the form of a
huge Golden Buddha and I was sitting
tiny little being in its hands and it
lifted me up off the
ground uh
and I heard
many truthful
things uh about
reality that form my very Foundation can
you give me
one
everybody
suffers
and so and nobody suffers more than
anybody else everybody has their own
suffering and everybody has their own
path to move through that
suffering um and to
heal and people do
heal but life is full of suffering
that's normal it's it's not a sense of
Duality suffering is part of the
Perfection of our
existence it really does change your
perspective on yourself and others when
you when you hear that that point about
suffering um being unavoidable because
then at least you can you don't treat
yourself as such a victim to that's
right suffering you realize that it's
part of it's It's fundamentally attached
to all the things that I love as well
you know that's right what about you
John have you ever had a paranormal
experience oh when the numbers just came
together perfectly
and I I don't know if this is a parent
normal experience but I um I was once
driving through the University of
Washington ARB burum and I was really
really sick and um and I was I was
driving uh toward my office because I
had a client who was suicidal and I I
hadn't been able to reach her to cancel
the appointment and I cancel all the
other appointments but you know I as
sick as I was I just didn't think I
could you know just not show up you know
so I had to show up and at least say I'm
really too sick you know physically to
see you but I care about you um and as I
was driving through the arinum you know
I was I've had a fever and I was
sneezing and coughing uh I felt the
presence of my parents in the car and
both both no longer living I felt my
mother on this cheek and my father on
this cheek and it was really very sweet
I just because of Julie's experiences I
kind of said oh well maybe this is real
you know and by the time I got through
the Arboretum all my cold symptoms were
gone and it was important for me to be
there for that client and I was healthy
enough to actually have a session with
her so that I don't know if that
constitutes a paranormal experience but
is she it's pretty weird she was okay
yeah thank you so much I've um I've
continued to learn so much from your
wonderful lovely work and our last
conversation was such a Smash Hit with
my audience everywhere I went people
would stop me and say oh my God I love
that episode with the Gans and I think
it's both your your wisdom um your your
knowledge but also the power of you
together forms such a diverse set of
perspectives which is useful in sort of
taking on some of these problems that
we've discussed today
which is really nice because you do have
very different perspectives and you come
at things differently and I think that
helps complete the whole picture and
thank you more broadly for the work that
you've done on relationships and love
over the last couple of decades because
people cite it everywhere I go not just
in the context of love but they cite it
in the context of business I used your
work on stage when I did a tour of
Australia recently I've heard I've gone
to conferences in Colombia and I've
heard people talk about your work on the
four horsemen and contempt and all these
kinds of things and your your love lab
as they call it so you're doing
incredibly important work targets the
most important thing which is keeping
humans together so thank you for all
that you do and thank you for being here
again thank you st and thank you very
much for being the again the best
interviewer we've had in 30
years isn't this cool every single
conversation I have here on the DI of
CEO at the very end of it you'll know I
asked the guest to leave a question in
the Diary of a CEO and what we've done
is we've turned every single question
written in the Diary of a CEO into these
conversation cards that you can play at
home so you've got every guest we've
ever had their question and on the back
of it if you scan that QR code you get
to watch the person who answered that
question we're finally revealing all of
the questions and the people that
answered the question the brand new
version two updated conversation cards
are out right now at Theon conversation
cards.com theyve sold out twice
instantaneously so if you are interested
in getting hold of some limited edition
conversation cards I really really
recommend acting quickly
[Music]
m